---
description: Incomplete
---

# 1.12 With so much envy the devil has always raged against Cluny

I promised above to speak about the revelations of the dead which occurred at Cluny or in its surroundings; even though many other deed all worthy of remembrance occurred in our times in this monastery, I thought it would be no little benefit to recount them also in this work for the utility of the readers.

&#x20;           I mentioned above that the ancient Enemy always is greatly jealous about the the discipline and the devotion to the divine offices of this monestary and it shows in multiple ways his boiling hostility against the inhabitants of this place. If I tried to recount below all this insofar as I am able to have knowledge of, I would provoke the interest of the reader or listener by such an enormous volume and I would find myself distant from my purpose. How can describe with how much malignity he attacks ceaselessly, or at least often, this celestial citadel, how man hostilities he creates against the soldiers of Christ who resist him whose frequent assaults they bear…

&#x20;           In effect, searching to desire the interior Host –that is to say, the Spirit– as he is accustomed, he brings to bear a whole host of temptations (outwardly) of which he is capable, and knowing himself to be rejected from the interior, marshals all his forces to combat the exterior.  Henceforeth blinded by their own folly, even always he threatens all the world invisibly, from time to time he apprears to some even visibly. And ignoring the good which God chose to draw rom his malignity, despite that he seeks to destroy the Lord’s troops, by the same act and despite it, it edifies them frequently.

In fact, seeking to destroy the interior enemy as was his want, namely the Spirit, he \[the devil] put in motion outwardly an entire arsenal of temptations as he was able, and grumbling about being rejected from the interior, he marshaled all his force to attack the exterior.
