# 2.5 How he cleaved to the Venerable Ralph of Rheims, afterwards the Archbishop.

...

In him, he \[the bishop of Reims\] discerned that which he recognized of himself and cherished in him, as it were, the image of his own virtues. As a wise man told him, “the similitude of manners accomplishes the concord of spirits.” Nothing is more true. Never in fact were dissimilar elements able to agree nor were contrary elements able to live together. For if someone attempts to associate discordance by dissimilarity with the help of something agreeable, he works in pure loss. As much, truly, they mutually repulse each other and are unable to be reunited if it is not, as we said, through a suitable third term. This is verified in elements, bodies, manners, and in any absolute domain, it is more clear than the day.... by the harmony of good manners and of a virtuous life, he placed himself on the par little by little through daily progress towards a great love of religion and of a holy life. 

He had been heard to praise, in multiple praisings, the customs and the degree of the Cluniac observance and he had remarked that he preferred the institutions of Cluny to those of diverse other institutions of religious.

From his desire and at his express request, he was stripped of the old man, redressed anew subject to the monastic rule and joined to the body of the monastery for as much as he could and ought to do.

...he came to Cluny and there, by the blessing of the abbot of Cluny, that which he lacked of the written profession and the usual benediction was complete; and furthermore integrally a monk of the heart, of the mouth, of habit and life, he gloried in the Lord....

