# Prologue to Book One

Among the divinely conferred powers of the Holy Spirit, the gift of miracles occupies an eminent position due to their very great utility, since through them the world is freed from the shadows of unfaithfulness and it is given the eternal light of truth. Even today, faith is increased, hope grows and charity is strengthened through them in the hearts of many of the faithful, whom were granted to be witnesses. I often find myself regretting how, when hidden by unfruitful silence, miraculous things cease to exist which occur in a good many places and in our times –though less common than in former times– because none puts his mind \[animus\] to writing them down. Since I have not been able to induce anyone but myself to this end, I prefer to attempt it with a pen \(such as I can\), not fearing to be judged presumptuous for such a thing.[\[1\]](applewebdata://D01BEDA5-1E0C-4260-9428-85454E8D0DE8#_ftn1) As was said already, I prefer that I, rather than no one, discuss such a useful topic. Lest I keep the reader in suspense too long, I will \[now\] begin to narrate, starting with a most suitable topic, namely the miracles relating to the body of Our Lord done in modern times and told to me.[\[2\]](applewebdata://D01BEDA5-1E0C-4260-9428-85454E8D0DE8#_ftn3)  


[\[1\]](applewebdata://D01BEDA5-1E0C-4260-9428-85454E8D0DE8#_ftnref1)Peter also writes in his _Summa_ against the Saracens, that he had hoped another would come foreward to write against Islam, but none did. \(A possible reference to letter 111 to BC to write against Islam, cf. LPV, II, p. 276.\)

[\[2\]](applewebdata://D01BEDA5-1E0C-4260-9428-85454E8D0DE8#_ftnref3)Rest of Latin. _Et ne diu suspensum lectorem teneam, a digniori parte incipiens, que… moderno tempore facta miracula, ad me pervenire poterunt, narrare incipiam_. DM, prologus. p. 3.

