# 108. to Guarinus, the Bishop of Amiens \(1127/44\)

To the venerable person and special friend of my heart, lord Guarinus, bishop of Amiens, brother Peter, humble abbot of the Cluniacs wishes the greeting which was received from him.

What do I say? What do I speak? What thanks could I offer to so sincere a friend? Your wise love distinguished, and it distinguished truly, between one kind of friend and another, between the true and the false, between those offering words and those showing deeds. Others promise great things under the great rewards of friendships and they pay back nothing. You promised nothing and, with none of ours due to you, you offer in return things great and numerous. This is the reason, this is the entire matter, this unbreakable chain by which we are tied to you, by which we are bound to you, by which –although apart– we reveal the undivided heart of our complete love and affection for you. But it is not astonishing. For who is not exceedingly drawn, who is not induced by such great expenses on your part, with no benefits compensating, as it is said, on our part? But if you arrange to offer to God an abundance of sacrifices–an undivided offering–, if you propose to immolate the head and the tailtogether, come, come I say, to us that we may see whom we have desired to see for so long and that even now we may enjoy the proceeds in Christ whom we also desire to enjoy forever somewhere else. Not only do we ask this through Him who loves us and who inspired you to love us, but we also beseech that your Cluny see you before the coming summer is over and, that it may gladden and rejoice over your long anticipated presence.

