# 47. to Matthew of Albano \(1131/5, likely 1134\)

Jerome, the most noble orator of the Christian peoples said in one of his letters, “Many monsters arise on the earth: we read of centaurs and sirens, owls and onocrotalosin Isaiah, Job describes the Leviathon and behemoth in mystic terms, the fables of the poets describe Cerberus and Cymphalides and the wild Erimantium. The Spains produce the tri-bodied Gerionem. Gaul alone does not have monsters, but abounded always in the strongest and most eloquent men.

Truly, a new monster has arisen among us, just as it is not he who confines so also it is not he who kills. Thus all are weakened who ought to strangle this unseen monster as soon as it appears, in order that by their silence they confess that no act of evil, nor anything new arise. Almost alone in your singular zeal of justice, hope remains distant in your men which the more it behoves that the betters be brought to bear on this business, so much the more …

The monks of Verdun having been expelled from their seats, clerics having entered to replace them, they forsoke their things, the occupied another’s places by force alone, with judgement on the harvest of the neighbours, they sent away the scyth, and most desirously devoured the fruits of them, with the proper gardeners going hungry. And what more can be show? What more deterstible monster is there? What more monstrous prodigy? The clerks of various orders, the canons of various professions and what do I do concerning the minors? The catacumen of the church

What does justice undertake among other fallen brothers? Why is innocented condemned with guilt? Why is the monastic institution expelled on account of certain monks expelled according to some? Or what if good monks do not succeed bad ones? We beg you, correct this?

