# 49. To Henry, the Bishop of Winchester \(1131\)

I now am bound by my promise, and I cheerfully accept the fetters for myself which I will never remove. I promise to guard you with the faith of a true friend. And if this is the case, then it is appropriate to avert the perfidy of a false friend. In truth, I would be a false friend if, speaking from the heart and in the heart, I conceal one thing in my mind and proffer another from my mouth. On account of this, since among friends all things are naked, I endeavour not to conceal anything except this, to whom I propose to reveal everything –even the very intimate. Therefore, with familiar daring, I deplore that Your excellence was readily provoked against me with justice some time ago, and that, on account of the trivial matter,  the established gravity of friendship...

I do not say this easily or lightly, but I showed that there would be absolutely nothing, if I did not avoid the prolixity of the letter out of concern for the delicacy of the one reading. Therefore, it ought not ...

Whence, he who... 

I call the enemy, however, not one inflicting evil deeds, but one denying the good, not one showing enmities by effect, but withdrawing the affect of friendship. I do not repeat the continual complaints, with which you are accustomed to fill the ears of our legates travelling in England. And I am not bringing up those strange things which are committed unto us before Charity, of which your very self should be nourisher, not the defender, and certainly a mediator.

