# 99.  Again to Pope Innocent

To the highest pontiff and our special father, the lord Pope innocent, brother Peter, the humble abbot of Cluniacs, gives obedience and love.

Having complete trust in \[your\] paternal favour, I am accustomed with filial presumption to commend even the distant and strange to \[his\] Apostolic Majesty. About those, I felt that I was often clearly heard and I hoped that I might be heard even more clearly about those known and close to me. On this account, I commend to your apostolic piety lord Heraclius, a canon of Lyons, a \[genuine\] twin of my heart, one in whom I have complete trust and one for whom there is no other reason for visiting the city than to see his Father, and to bind his soul even more closely to yours, given over to the manifold advantages of his sons. I ask for him, and I do not blush to ask, because the evidence of a youth spent mostly among seculars \(as clerics are called\) neither could not bring me to dismay in prayers, nor could it turn your ears away from these things to be heard clearly. He asked this, if it were to please the Paternal Love from Lyons, in which church he was educated and he converted to the religious life, and he asked this also from lord Stephen the archdeacon, about which, if it is possible to be believed, I make you the judge. Let him therefore be received into your affection, I beg you, let him be fostered at your knee so that by your favour he may consider himself not shut off by himself, and so that he may strive insistently to undertake those things on account by which he might obtain the multiplying grace of you and of God for himself.

