# 85. A Letter from Hato, Bishop of Troyes to the above Peter \(1141\)

To use of words of a philosopher, the distance of our locations cannot divide nor can inconvenient times separate the rulership of love. Holding the feelings of domination and ruling the empire, it always loves, even if it is not possible to see whom it loves. For true friendship is unacquainted with forgetfulness, it does not suffer any interruption. Nor does it receive comfort from impossibility, nor remedy from difficulty. Although the battle lines of worldly affairs threaten, though it is overwhelmed by the tumultuous voices of the roaring crowds, nonetheless since he keeps him in mind whom he loves, thinking about him, rejoicing in him. It is done according to the laws of friendship, with the result that I rejoice in you, I continually reflect upon you, I am not unmindful of  your sanctity in which I am glad to have found such help. I am blessed, who trusts in you to be the very return of love; I am more blessed if this is for certain. But the situation is that I am unable to dissemble further: friendship compels that I continue. O God! Where are the frequent letter, the constant consolation, the accustomed eloquence by which you are accustomed to restore your old friend. But perhaps pens are not found, the ink lacks, there are no messengers, the road is mountainous, dangers arise? But enough is said to a wise man. 

The lord Theobald, the archdeacon of Senon wishes this one thing: to come to you. Our business, which your friend master Nicholas carried to Rome, had a conclusion better than we had hoped. Please write back at the pleasure of your dignity, that I may know what I should respond to the archdeacon.

